the
world human rights the Cornerstone of
equality and fairness are universally
recognized principles to which every
individual is entitled that's regardless
of nationality gender ethnicity religion
language or any other status the
universal Declaration of Human Rights a
landmark document adopted by the United
Nations in 1948 said out a fundamental
and Universal standard for these
inalienable rights since its Inception
the UN has been at the forfront of
advocating for monitoring and enforcing
these rights through an array of
treaties International laws and
humanitarian
initiatives however a different story
unfolds in some parts of our world
despite the un's watch the Spectre of
human rights violations hauns the most
vulnerable in Conflict ridden areas like
Ukraine Sudan and Gaza Tales of
appalling suffering are
emerging where the rights to life safety
and basic needs are not just infringed
but often defiled and
shattered and the Advent of new
technologies such as artificial
intelligence and the escalating climate
change crisis also present unprecedented
challenges to Human Rights so is their
need to re-evaluate the human rights
framework to address the pressing
concern the UN High Commissioner for
human rights fulka Turk talks to Al
jazer un High Commissioner for human
rights fulka hook thank you for talking
to aljazera to begin with a lot of
conflict in the world at this time but
let's start right away with what is
happening in Gaza and the occupied West
Bank and Israel's actions there which
its critics contend is a massive
abrogation of Human Rights well we are
seeing an unmitigated tragedy um we see
very grave violations of international
humanitarian law um we also seeing the
fact that humanitarian action in the way
that it's normally supposed to be done
is not possible in the way that people
would respond to the suffering to the
massive suffering of Palestinians
especially in in Gaza we have now over
1.2 million people just in in Rafa uh so
you it's getting winter it's getting
cold so you can imagine what this means
and we don't have enough food to to take
to them we don't have the water that is
necessary we don't have the medicine
that is
necessary and this well and the West
Bank we we have seen a rapid
deterioration we have over 7
271 Palestinians killed 69 children
among them since the 7th of October and
of course let's not forget we need also
so we have seen the trauma in Israel we
have seen what happened there and so I
see in front of us a situation of of
horror for all communities now some
within the Israeli government contend
that when Hamas launched that attack on
October the 7th some of its targets
including women and children it did not
obey laws of war or laws of humanitarian
uh action they argue that because of
that it's okay for Israel not to obey
such stringent restrictions either
what's your view of that argument so
what we saw happen on the seventh and
the eth uh of October is absolutely
horrific and it's
unacceptable but I mean it doesn't
absolve Israel of its responsibility to
respect International humanitarian law
and international human rights law you
cannot otherwise it becomes revenge and
Vengeance and and that never leads to a
result that is good for for any
community and I mean that's also the
promise of of Human Rights the promise
is to apply human rights equally to
everyone and and that's what we have to
ensure at this very very tragic moment
in the history of the Middle East now
some I argue that the situation is
compounded by the US supply of weapons
to Israel in carrying out these
operations now the US for the record
says that it only provides weapons to
those countries that are in and I quote
them full compliance with International
Humanity Arian law and the laws of war
but clearly on the face of it Israel is
not in accordance with these principles
look I mean it's clear that all parties
who have any influence over in this case
Israel Over Hamas need to exercise their
influence to get them back to reason and
to get them back to a situation where
international law is respected and we
are not at this space at this at this
point point in time and we the US
argument is that that's got to be done
through interaction that it doesn't want
to use sanction to force the parties
together that it would rather use its
relationship with Israel to bring about
this end is that a
workable well we see increasingly a
narrative that points out the importance
of respect for international
humanitarian law and let's also not
forget we have the whole International
Community you saw what happened the
general assembly passed the resolution
calling for
humanitarian ceasefire which by the way
is what all of us have been doing for
quite a long time and that really is the
only solution we need to see an end to
this violence and we need to see a
humanitarian ceasefire human rights
ceasefire because it's also ultimately
about the human rights of of all of all
of both Palestinians and Israelis and we
need to see an end to this nothing good
comes out of violence and but here you
have the intractable problem us veto in
in the security Council the US vote
against a ceasefire in uh the general
assembly this is a major stumbling block
is it not it absolutely is and you saw
what the Secretary General did um not
long ago he actually used one paragraph
one article of the UN Charter to put
member states and in particular the
security Council in front of its
responsibilities by invoking article 99
now some have pointed out the language
being used by some members of the
Israeli government you've had reference
to gaza's nakba which is in reference to
the catastrophe of 1948 when millions of
Palestinians were displaced or killed
you had reference to Palestinians in the
most derogatory of terms now some are
arguing that this conveys an intent to
displace or remove the Palestinian
people which in turn is one of the
qualifications for a genocide would you
go so far as to see that happening I
mean I'm very worried about dehumanizing
language I'm very worried about the type
of statements that we have seen both on
the part of Hamas but also on the part
of some political and military leaders
in Israel and I have made these concerns
extremely well known because they are I
mean as we always see in so many
situations around the world they give us
great cause to worry and they could
indicate a risk of atrocity CRI indeed
now let's move to the other point of
conflict uh the Russian invasion of
Ukraine now President Biden is on the
record as describing that as a genocide
your view look I mean Ukraine is again
we have seen an a war that has been
going on for almost two years with a
devastating toll on the civilian
population with over we could verify at
least over 10,000 people being killed
civilian infrastructure
structure massively damaged
over almost a
thousand education facilities destroyed
400 over 400 hospitals being uh damaged
and of course massive human rights
violations so as and with the onset of
well we have already we are not even in
the onset of winter we are in winter
very very cve humanitarian situation so
it's clear that the world needs to wake
up and bring us back to we have over 55
conflict around the world one quarter of
humanity lives in a situation of
conflict of violence but the world also
appears to exist on double standards in
many cases the US uh would vote against
the Russian invasion of Ukraine it will
veto any resolution calling for a
ceasefire in
Gaza these situations are pretty similar
does this type of dual action or
duplicity as they may put it undermine
your attempts as your body to be able to
forge some form of lasting respect for
humanitarian law look what member states
are doing has always been in their own
logic uh and has always been what what
they do my mandate is an independent one
and my mandate applies itself to each
and every country and to each and every
situation and we apply it in in the way
that we that we see fit uh um what I
think we need to also bear in mind that
despite the negative news I I've just
come out of a high level event in Geneva
where we commemorated did not celebrate
we commemorated the 75th anniversary of
the United of the UN Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and I was
encouraged by the fact that over 155
member states
pledged very conrete measures to advance
human rights we got five countries
saying that they would abolish the death
penalty we have 50 4 countries who who
said that they would review their
legislation to from a gender equality uh
perspective to remove a discriminatory
Provisions we have uh 14 that said they
would establish a national human rights
institution we have uh 10 that now want
to strengthen accountability measure so
we also see this and I think it's
important despite the negativity and the
somber moment that we are in that there
there is also progress and there is
there are countries there are leaders
there are people especially young people
who care about human rights and who want
the right thing to happen every time one
situation appears for a moment to be
ameliorated another one breaks out
you've got a war underway in Sudan for
example for the last few months to what
extent does this prevalence of action
like the war in Sudan coming on top of
everything else how difficult does that
make your job in terms of getting that
needed respect for human rights look
Sudan I it was the first country I
visited when I became High Commissioner
and I visited it because I was so
impressed by Young People by women who
stood up in 2019 to overthrow 30 years
of military dictatorship and I wanted to
go there myself and see and speak to
them and they just had a year earlier
another coup so I had a chance to speak
to them to speak to young people to
speak to the the resistance committees
and I was so I was so encouraged by
their Spirit of of determination of
perseverance and then a couple of months
later when we all thought that there
would be a civilian transition these two
guys decided to wage war against each
other and it's the worst situation since
56 for the people of Sudan and we don't
see any sign of deescalation at the
moment and I can only hope
that both aloran and
HTI see that a military solution is not
in their own interest and I hope that
accountability will be served because we
have seen very grave violations of
international humanitarian law and
international human rights law and it
drags down the people of the whole
country now you're talking about two
leaders who fought a war against a
dictator together who promised to return
to civilian rule together now they are
opposed to each other this is just
another example of how easily good
intentions can get totally disrupted one
of the missing pieces was
accountability in
Sudan and so again if we don't see
accountability if we see that
impunity is just accepted we have a
problem we see this in many conflict
situations so another big lesson learned
is first of all take human rights more
seriously but not just
within the national context were also
within the international context heat
the early warning signs but then also
take accountability more seriously and
and we have seen examples where it has
worked you know we had the establishment
of the international CRI criminal
Tribunal for for oslavia international
criminal Tribunal for Rwanda now the
international criminal uh Court the
IC but it's not enough we need much more
of it especially in situations where you
where you where people have have gone
into conflict and transitional Justice
truth find the truth telling and
accountability are key let's take the
issue of accountability shortly before
you took over uh your predecessor issued
a report condemning Chinese treatment of
the Wagers in the western Province uh
and that was a damming report and it
stated very clearly that China is
responsible for crimes against
Humanity now what accountability has
there been there for China's treatment
of the Wagers I have been very clear
about the human rights situation in
China and I have because that's also
part of my job I have engaged with them
and I hope that this engagement will
lead to changes and we have an upcoming
Universal periodic review which is
within the human rights system a peer
review among member states and I hope
that we can really build on that and
that we can see changes that are
necessary once again that that report
said as I said uh crimes against
humanity but genocide was not mentioned
is this a conscious decision not to take
that LE it didn't by the way it did not
the report did not say that crimes
against humanity were committed they
said there is a risk maybe maybe correct
it could amount too but it didn't uh it
didn't specifically say that um look
when we do our analysis we do it on the
basis of the facts that we have
assembled we have a very rigorous
methodology and we do that wherever we
work and so when we say something we we
are yeah we use this on the basis of the
analysis that my office has has has been
able to conduct just a slight sideways
movement one of the issues with human
rights is new digital Technologies is
now using the example of China once
again there are reports that facial
recognition uh software is being used
which can identify the race of those
being examined now this as well is
reportedly being used in Israel against
Palestinians the same
technology how much of a human rights
contravention is the use of Technology
like this in for example identifying
race look when it comes to
generative artificial intelligence it's
a big human rights concern but first of
all let's also say the positive again
artificial intell generative AI will
help us a lot to overcome some of the
problems science or more generally does
and Technology but we need human rights
guardrails and if there's one lesson to
be learned from the social media
platforms is that these guardrails had
not been put into place early enough
because what we see on social media
platforms if it's not regulated if if if
if the guarders are not there you see
the spread of this harmful
disinformation you see the spread of
hate speech and and incitement to
violence and we have many examples of
that and so what we need is especially
for the development of of generative so
that it doesn't lead to facial
recognition and racial profiling and and
the marginalization of already uh groups
at risk that these guardrails are built
in and that's a very strong message that
comes from the UN you saw the Secretary
General has just uh established an ad an
advisory repard on artificial
intelligence and also our my own office
wants to provide that knowledge to the
tech companies and we have started and
we have actually had for quite some time
now a dialogue with with bch companies
um precisely to ensure that they
understand that human rights apply when
they develop these things and there's
again a question of accountability at
some stage that needs to be asked tissue
here is that the UN can say this is what
needs to be done but it is a nation
state like China that puts in those
guard roles into the technology that it
is using or Israel's case with using
face recognition technology to what
extent do you have the power to not only
advise nation states but also ensure
that they follow through on what the
advice is well that's the problem of
international law more generally because
we don't have the enforcement power the
only thing we can do is use the fact
that we have the Human Rights Council
the fact that we have treaty bodies we
have binding legal obligations and that
we can only continue to point out these
obligations uh analyze it document it
report it and well and then see which
mechanisms picks it up so that it
actually gets gets done and I have to
say you know also looking ahead we have
70 elections coming up next year 4
billion people will will will will go
into elections 4 billion people what I'm
worried about is the potential of
harmful disinformation on social media
platforms and it's also a responsibility
of the business companies because we
also know that some of the business
models are unfortunately built on
negative news spread of hatred of
harmful disinformation so there is also
a responsibility for member states to
regulate from a human rights perspective
but also for businesses to to be aware
of their own obligations under human
rights for for for this type of services
that they offer now sometimes you see
Nations undercutting their own
principles with something like human
rights for example let me take the
example of the United States where
presidents of universities have been
pillared for refusing to say that this
is hate speech for example saying that
her M's messages about Israel are hate
speech and they are defending that by a
First Amendment principle a freedom of
speech principle which is underpinned by
a Supreme Court decision in
1969 and yet the US itself even the
White House waited in on that argument
and pillared those who refused to
discuss something without a context
basing their position on a Supreme Court
decision the country itself the White
House is ignoring that decision it would
appear well that's a national issue it's
not an issue of freedom of speech and
freedom of expression when it comes to
international human rights law because
internation human rights law has
exceptions when it comes to incitement
to violence and hate speech and we are
very clear that that's not in line with
human rights so when it comes to the
international legal framework we
actually have very clearly defined
exceptions that you cannot incite to
violence or hatred of of on the basis of
race or if it's for we against women or
or basis of sexual orientation and
gender identity so human rights law is
actually the answer to and the solution
to this issue a recurring theme
throughout the time that we've been
talking you have used the word a number
of times
accountability how does one establish
accountability you've got a security
Council that is crippled by The veto
effectively so no sanction can come from
the security Council on most occasions
you've got a general assembly in which
the vote is not binding how do you given
these circumstances start establishing
accountability but also demanding
accountability again it's good to go
back to history because the security
Council was paralyzed for pretty much
most of the period of the Cold War it
didn't stop accountability because you
could especially when it comes to human
rights violation Universal jurisdiction
came up and was established for instance
under the convention Against torture if
you are a
torturer you are and if you if a member
state has signed the convention Against
torture it is under the the obligation
to to prosecute you so there there are
ways and means to work on accountability
beyond the security Council or even the
general assembly by the way it is still
a very strong signal if there is a
general assembly
resolution with a vast majority of
member states calling for humanitarian
ceas fire for example as we saw just now
in Gaza um so one shouldn't
underestimate that either politically
but it is true at the legal at the legal
level we need both the functioning of
the international criminal court but
also of course Universal jur
jurisdiction to to be applied much more
rigorously when it comes to violations
of human rights would reform of the
security Council make your job in terms
of enforcing human rights Easier by
perhaps giving a greater representation
on the council or indeed removing the
Vita which has been the stumbling block
on so many occasions you know we have
had an ongoing debate on the reform of
the security counil for a very long time
and indeed there is hopefully a chance
that this will go ahead by it being much
more representative I mean the details
of course will have to be worked out by
the member states it's quite a complex
legal issue by the way but what I hope
that the security Council will do in the
future is actually look at human rights
in a much more Central
way and that means because from a
prevention perspective if you see
violations of human rights is an
indication that things are going arai in
a country and that analysis needs to
feed into their deliberations whether or
not it's going to resolve the paralysis
that we see at the moment I don't know
but it is important for the
International Community to understand
that human rights has actually something
to say and more centrally to say about
what's happening in different countries
and what the responsibilities is
especially of those countries who have
influence over Waring parties for
example you were talking about human
rights it's like a canary in a gold mine
it's when that they are contravene that
you know that something is going wrong
yes I think it's a very good image but
it's also a solution it's not just the
canary and the Goldman it's it's also
it's also a solution um for instance
economy human rights and economic
economic systems were always something
that one wouldn't talk about they
wouldn't economists told me they never
were taught about human rights actually
if you are an economist or if you are
responsible for macroeconomic policies
in your country and if you don't know
about human rights you will see a rise
in inequalities you will see that
marginalized and vulnerable groups are
not going to be protected and you will
not invest in Education Health and
Social protection which is what we see
was the big lesson from covid-19 that
you actually that those countries who
had invested in it did much better so my
again my message is human rights is also
a solution and I wish that each and
every discipline around the world would
take human rights much more seriously
and even know more about human rights so
that it can actually prevent the worst
from happening could you extrapolate
that theory about economics to climate
change as well yes because climate
change you know we already see what's
happening in the Sahel for example we
know that we know in Somalia I was just
in Iraq in August I mean I went to Parts
where I know that you know in Basra in
the South where the where where the
temperatures go up to 50 over 50 degrees
centigrade and not just a couple of days
for weeks on end Barren Landscapes
around me at 30 years ago where you had
still
Lush uh rivers and and date bombs and
and and and dates uh that were there and
and where people could actually live I
talk to those communities who said we
can no longer live in these
circumstances and they will be displaced
eventually or already displaced and we
see the same in the Sahel competition
over scarce resources Means War and
that's what we need to prevent so
climate change is the biggest challenge
that we face and unfortunately we don't
talk enough about it anymore bman Turk
un High Commissioner for human rights
thank you for talking to Al jaer thank
you for the
invitation